1 (a) Discuss the Requirement Analysis phase and System Design
phase in the Waterfall model in terms of (i) the purpose of these
phases (ii) the activities involved and (iii) the deliverables.
[12 marks]
(b) Explain what architectural design strategies should be chosen to
address the non-functional criteria (i) availability and (ii)
performance
[6 marks]
(c) Sketch a swim lane activity diagram for the following scenario:
“Mary will connect to the site of an e-commerce system and
search for a camera. The system will provide detailed
information about the product with a price or it says that it’s out
of stock. She will choose a camera if it is available. She will then
be prompted to pay for the camera and provide payment details
as well as a delivery address. Once the payment has been
cleared by the bank authentication system an email is sent to
Mary to confirm the purchase and the purchase is complete”.
[7 marks]
[25 marks]
2 (a) For the SCRUM approach to software development explain the
following three terms. Also, sketch a diagram to show their
relationship to each other
i) Product backlog
ii) Sprint
iii) Sprint backlog
[9 marks]
(b) Discuss the following principles when designing a GUI
i) User familiarity
ii) Consistency
iii) Reduce the user’s memory load
iv) Recoverability
[8 marks]
(c) Explain (within a maximum of 6 lines) why the V model in
software process model is also called the “Validation and
Verification” model.
[8 marks]
[25 marks]
3 (a) Using the Client Server 3 tier architectural design pattern,
suggest the components at the (i) interface layer and the (ii)
business application layer that might be part of an e-commerce
system that allows users to buy products on the internet. Your
answer should include the component’s name, its purpose and
its location/layer in the architecture.
[12 marks]
(b) You are a project manager; explain in what context you will [8 marks]
adapt the incremental process models for software
development.
(c) Give an example of where the state of an object depends on
that object’s association links
[5 marks]
[25 marks]
4 (a) Present 3 advantages of Incremental development models over
the traditional development model such as the water fall model.
[6 marks]
(b) Most of a system's requirements specify that the system should
do what it is intended to do. Is it also appropriate to specify that
the system should not do what it is not intended to do? If your
answer is no, explain why; if your answer is yes, give an
example.
[6 marks]
(c) In general when a company would like to advertise its products,
it creates campaigns of advertisements. A campaign of
advertisement for a product includes several advertisements on
several media outlets such as television, radio stations,
newspapers and magazines, in cinemas and the internet. These
companies would like to control if the advertisements they paid
for appeared as they were supposed to.
A market research company intends to develop an Advertising
Expenditure system to provide services to those companies.
This market research company collects data on advertising from
various media outlets such as a short description about the
advertising content, when the advertisement appeared (date
and time), the duration, where it appeared (e.g. in what channel,
what magazine, etc.). The collected data then can be analyzed
in various ways to measure the expenditure advertising of these
companies. A client (the advertising company) can request a
report about the advertisements that have appeared for a
product and the expenditure information.
Draw a class diagram that includes information about the
Campaign, Advertisement, the Client and any additional
information as necessary to represent the data aspect for the
Advertising Expenditure system.

1. (a) Present and explain the different phases of the waterfall model
in the software development process. You may include a
diagram to illustrate your answer.
(b) Discuss three advantages and three disadvantages of the
waterfall model.
(c) Explain the necessity for project scheduling in software project
management.
2. (a) State concisely what functional requirements and non-functional
requirements are.
(b) If you develop an Online Hotel booking system, what are four
functional requirements you are interested in?
(c). Describe the actor, use case, association and dependency
elements of a use case diagram with UML. Create a use case
diagram for the following social networking system:
A new user can create an account. Existing users just sign in.
Users can create and update their profile, send requests to make
friends to other users. Users can post their status or upload their
photos.
3. (a) Discuss the emergence of agile methods within the context of
iterative and incremental development.
(b) Describe the terms product backlog and sprint in SCRUM
approach.
(c) Describe the main activities in XP Planning.
4.(a) Explain the difference between Composition and Aggregation
association. Give an example of these two types of association.
(b). A part of the requirement analysis of a DVD renting system is
described as follows:
A DVD renting shop wants to develop an online DVD renting
system. The system should allow users to search DVDs by title,
make online bookings and then collect the DVD at the shop or
ask for delivery at home. In order to make a booking, users
need to sign into the system. A new user needs to create an
account including their email address and password, their home
address (optional) and their credit card information.
A DVD title includes the following information: a title type such
as adventure film, classic film, fiction film, or music, or
documentary, etc., a title name, a production year, some
artist/singer names, and an image of the corresponding DVD.
A DVD title is associated with several physical DVDs. Each
DVD has a unique code, and a status such as rented, or
available. A booking is made on DVD title(s). A customer can
book several DVD titles, indicate the date they want to collect
the DVDs or if they want the DVD to be delivered at their
address. In this case, they need to provide their home address.
When the customer collects the DVDs (or they are delivered),
they are updated status to rented.
Design a class diagram or entity relationship diagram to
describe the following information and relationships between
them: Customer, DVD title, DVD, Booking, Collection/Delivery.


1 (a) All software processes includes four fundamental process
activities: software specification, software development, software
validation and software evolution. Discuss these stages in the
software lifecycle with reference to the classical waterfall model.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of this model?
[10 marks]
(b) Describe the 2 basic types of Evolutionary Development. [8 marks]
(c) Iterative development can be applied to any of the generic
process models. Using a diagram, explain how the concept of
iteration is implemented in Incremental delivery. What are the
advantages of Incremental Development?
[7 marks]
[25 marks]
2 (a) Discuss the emergence of agile methods within the context of
iterative and incremental development.
[8 marks]
(b) Describe, using a diagram the process stages and practices in
‘Extreme Programming’. Define what three of the following terms
mean and explain how they are applied to the XP development
process:
i. User Stories
ii. Release Planning
iii. CRC Cards
iv. Spike Solution
[12 marks]
(c) If you were a software development manager attempting to
evaluate whether to apply an Extreme Programming software
development model to a project, what software project and team
characteristics do you think should influence your decision?
[5 marks]
[25 marks]
3 (a) Describe the actor, use case, association and dependency
elements of a use case diagram. Give an example of how they
are used.
[15 marks]
(b) A house alarm system is made up of a smoke alarm system and
a burglar alarm system. The smoke alarm system will issue a
warning when its smoke alarm detects smoke as will the burglar
alarm when its motion sensors or perimeter sensors detect
intruders. Both of these will alert the authorities when the events
occur. The authorities comprise the police and the fire
department. The home owner arms and disarms the system.
The system authenticates the owner.
Identify the actors and use cases in the system and create a
UML use case diagram for the system.
[10 marks]
[25 marks]
4 (a) Describe the different associations/relationships used in a UML
class diagram. Illustrate each with a simple example. Then,
explain, using a simple example, the difference between the
Aggregation and Composition association.
[8 marks]
(b) Describe the purpose of the phases of the Unified Process
Model. Use a diagram to illustrate how the different disciplines
evolve through the different phases.
[10 marks]
(c) Draw a sequence diagram with the following specification:
– John is a computer user who wants to check his
email
– When he clicks on his computer to check for
emails the server will send any unsent ones
– It then checks for new emails and the server
returns a corresponding response
– If there are new emails these will be downloaded
– Any old emails will be deleted

1 (a) Discuss what risk management is in relation to the management
of a software process - include a diagram as part of your
answer.
[5 marks]
(b) What is black box testing? What is white box testing? [6 marks]
(c) With the aid of an example explain the concept of equivalence
partitioning in the area of software testing.
[6 marks]
(d) Using the diagram below discuss how path testing works in the
area of software testing, and identify all possible test cases for
this binary search flow graph.
[8 marks]
[25 marks]
2 (a) In relation to software requirements explain the following terms:
functional requirements, non-functional requirement and domain
requirements.
[5 marks]
(b) Using an ATM as an example, describe three functional
requirements and two non-functional requirements.
[5 marks]
(c) Briefly describe the waterfall and spiral software process models
mentioning any problems associated with them. Include
diagrams in your answer.
[15 marks]
CS335 Page 1 of 2 Autumn 2012
[25 marks]
3 (a) There are many different schemas to structure a software
development team. Describe two such schemes and discuss
their advantages and disadvantages
[6 marks]
(b) Describe the different types of visibility that can be applied to
the elements in a UML model. You should include the symbol
used in UML to represent each of these types.
[9 marks]
(c) Discuss how Component Based Software Engineering works
and describe the advantages of using this technique.
[10 marks]
[25 marks]
4 (a) Describe the difference between Aggregation and Composition,
and show how they are represented in the Unified Modeling
Language (UML) by providing an example of each.
[5 marks]
(b) Describe the process of integration testing using a diagram to
help explain the process.
[10 marks]
(c) The table below shows activities, their duration, and activity
interdependencies. Given this information draw the corresponding
activity network. You can assign any project start date. On your
diagram you should highlight the critical path.
